
These commands help you navigate, create, delete, and manage files and folders.


ls: Lists the contents of a directory. This is one of the most frequently used commands.
Example: ls -l (lists in long format, showing permissions, owner, size, etc.)
pwd: Prints the current working directory, showing your current location in the file system.
cd: Changes the current directory.
Example: cd /home/user/documents (changes to the 'documents' directory)
Example: cd .. (moves up one directory level)
Example: cd ~ (changes to the user's home directory)
mkdir: Creates a new directory.
Example: mkdir new_folder
rmdir: Deletes an empty directory.
Example: rmdir empty_folder
touch: Creates an empty file or updates the timestamp of an existing file.
Example: touch new_file.txt
cp: Copies files or directories.
Example: cp file.txt /path/to/destination
Example: cp -r directory /path/to/destination (recursively copies a directory and its contents)
mv: Moves or renames files and directories.
Example: mv old_name.txt new_name.txt (renames a file)
Example: mv file.txt /path/to/new_location (moves a file)
rm: Deletes files or directories.
Example: rm file.txt
Example: rm -r directory_to_delete (recursively deletes a directory and its contents)
cat: Displays the contents of a file.
Example: cat my_document.txt
less: Allows you to view file contents page by page, useful for large files.
Example: less large_log.txt
head: Displays the first few lines of a file (default is 10 lines).
Example: head -n 5 file.txt (displays the first 5 lines)
tail: Displays the last few lines of a file (default is 10 lines).
Example: tail -n 5 file.txt (displays the last 5 lines)

System Information and Utilities

These commands provide information about your system and help with general tasks.


echo: Prints text to the terminal.
Example: echo "Hello, Linux!"
man: Displays the manual page for a command, providing detailed information about its usage and options.
Example: man ls
clear: Clears the terminal screen.
uname: Prints system information, such as the kernel name.
Example: uname -a (shows all system information)
whoami: Displays the current username.
df: Reports file system disk space usage.
du: Estimates file space usage.
top: Displays Linux processes, showing CPU and memory usage in real-time.
ps: Reports a snapshot of the current processes.

Permissions and Ownership